Title: More thoughts on COGS
Category: COGS
Tags: COGS, game development

I put the last post on the COGS Facebook group and Andrew made some good points, and I talked to V and Billy and they made similar points (those two also gave me other ideas which I will talk about later in this post). Basically, making a game that's big enough to be a group project is difficult to do during the semester for a variety of reasons, moreso if people don't have extrinsic motivation like getting a grade. So I don't think we're going to do a big club-wide game project.

Suggestions that were made for other things to do: still make games, but on a smaller scale. Have mini-hackathons on the weekend where the goal is to make some small game that fits a theme. If the livecoding thing goes well (oh, by the way, I think we're doing to do a 2d tron game.) we can do more of those. I am a bit afraid that I will just end up awkwardly standing there. Hopefully I can get people to participate by seeding the audience with people who helped write the game in the first place.

One thing that we definitely can't do is just gather people in a room and say "okay, now make games." That's not going to work. Anyone who could do that without needing any help probably already is and doesn't need someone to tell them. The people we want to get into the club are people who either don't know how to make games, and people whose CS abilities are good enough but they don't have artists to work with or realize that making games is fun or something. 

So we need to have events that focus on teaching people how to make games, and getting people who normally wouldn't consider trying to make games to try and make games. This includes getting artists and possibly musicians involved, and we need to follow up on leads in that direction as well. We have an entire art school; some of the people there must think that making video game art sounds cool.

More importantly: food. We can't use the money Rutgers gives us (however that much ends up being. I would guess maybe $50? We can use it for Unreal Engine/Unity/whatever site licenses), but we can use money we get from outside sources for whatever we want, including getting pizza for talks/meetings. So, V and Billy suggested we use USACS' contact excel sheet and/or cold-email people who have some sort of stake in game development, e.g. Microsoft, and ask them to sponsor us/throw us money. They can send people to come give a talk or whatever. Oh look I just found [this neat map](http://www.gamedevmap.com/index.php?query=New+York+City) that has a list of game development companies near NYC. If it's a game studio that actually makes games I don't really care if they give us money if they can send devs or someone down to talk to us, or if they let us come visit their offices or something. (and we could use Rutgers money for bus fare I think) Oh, interesting. I was looking at that list and apparently the [IGDA](http://www.igda.org/), the organization that originally ran the Global Game Jam, is in South Jersey. Oh hey, Rockstar's headquarters [is in NYC](http://www.rockstargames.com/careers/openings/rockstar-nyc). 

I definitely think if we get devs from some of these companies to come give talks on whatever and if even a few of them give us money, COGS will be on its way to becoming a legitimate-seeming club.
